[Music]
welcome to stepping out of Babylon
produced by Sousou praiano Babylon is
everywhere if the isms and schisms not
only within the system but within
ourselves
let's unify stand aligned and step out
of Babylon
[Music]
[Applause]
hi everybody my name is sue seprieono
and my guest today is Peter Dale Scott
Peter Dale Scott dr. Peter Dale Scott is
a professor of English at the University
of California in Berkeley and looking at
a big pile of books he's written here
including coming to Jakarta a poem about
terror which dr. Scott describes as his
most important work but probably not one
that we're not going to talk too much
about today but I want to let you know
that it exists and he also has written
along with Jonathan Marsh so Marshall
and Jane hunter the iran-contra
connection secret teams and covert
operations in the Regan era is the
subtitle and most recently cocaine
politics drugs armies in the CIA in
Central America and the co-author of
that along with Peter Dale Scott is
Jonathan Marshall so I want to welcome
you dr. Scott and ask you to tell us all
those things that are some of those
things that most Americans and most
people in the world don't know about
what's going on with the CIA and the US
government and well what I would call
the shadow government the the covert
government what I call deep politics let
me begin by trying to summarize what we
talked about in cocaine politics that's
the most recent book that we've written
and it's the most current Americans are
certainly aware that drugs are
a very very very real problem that are
turning whole communities into war zones
the usual analysis of our drug problem
is to say it's a problem of supply and
demand and we actually talk but the
government talks about supply side
solutions which is doing something about
countries like Peru and Colombia versus
demand side solutions which then focus
on the people who actually consume the
drugs our analysis is quite different we
say there are not two but three aspects
to this problem and that there's the
government dimension in between that we
have to talk not just about supply side
solutions and demand side solutions both
of those kinds of solutions always
target the powerless where there is
people living in inner cities or whether
it's peasants living in poor parts of
the third world there is also the what
we call the the governmental connection
the vertical dimension to the drug trade
which is powerful intermediate
traffickers who are powerful and who are
successful because they enjoy some kind
of privileged relationship to the
governments under which they work and
work in alliance with so that's why we
chose to write about Central America in
particular originally we had Contras in
our subtitle but we were looking at the
evidence accumulated about the
involvement of Contras and their
suppliers in drug trafficking with the
not only the connivance but ultimately
the protection of the CIA these kind of
people occasionally would get arrested
but wouldn't get brought to trial or at
least would not would get only a kind of
token sentence because the CIA had been
using these people and did not want the
truth to come out
in a public trial so that there's a kind
of protection conferred upon such people
with what I call a CIA immunity if you
work with the CIA
then you're pretty sure that you're not
going to get involved we had a very good
example of this back in 1970 when of all
people the Nixon administration arrested
a number of ex-cia Cubans and announced
that they had just broken the largest
heroin and cocaine trafficking network
in the country well in fact nearly all
of those people got off it turned out
they found one or another judicial
technicality on which to let them off
these people were simply too close to
the CIA and too involved in past
activities with the CIA to be prosecuted
in open trials by the American judicial
system we've had a number of such cases
coming down to the Contra era when the
they're frequently the biggest cases of
their time and that's what our book is
about a whole series of such episodes
and the fact that these people got off
so coming back to solutions to the drug
situation it it seems very obvious to us
that instead of always going after the
the teenager or the peasant we should go
after this governmental connection
itself that you could say that's a
utopian solution because the CIA is very
powerful but we have such a crisis now
that I think it should be a test for
politicians are they willing to take on
this issue and recognize the involvement
of the CIA and the drug traffic or just
be part of covering up the situation
really do you think that most Americans
understand the extent of the evolved
evolved Monteux the CIA which is part of
the government right of the United
States my understanding is that this
involvement is goes back to what the 40s
I think I read the forties you could
take it back even earlier but what we
saw in World War two was an interruption
of global trafficking and then right
after world war two we saw the
international drug traffic put back
together with the not just the tolerance
but in many cases the actual assistance
of governmental intelligence agencies
who wanted to use the drug traffickers
particularly the the west and first
above all the CIA wanted to use them in
the fight against communism so they use
the Sicilian Mafia in Italy and they
used the Corsican mafia in France and
those two mafias became the cornerstones
of the European drug traffic and the
principle rings who were importing
heroin into North America and the United
States and then there was the Vietnam
War I mean there was some of this I want
you to get a history of it I do because
I think I want I really want I don't
think that people get it I mean it's
such an astoundingly terrible thing that
the same government that's saying
they're stopping fighting you know the
war on drugs and all that and is that
the very same people or maybe not
exactly the same people but well you
know much more about this and I - but
seems to me like the same people some of
the same people anyway who are saying we
have to stop all this are the same
people who are perpetrating it and they
are our government or some part of our
government that is so I'm repeating it
because it's so astounding I think that
people go counter to our common sense
doesn't it you know the way we're
conditioned to think about things it's
very hard to make that kind of fact fit
into what we're you know I myself was
taught political science in the
university I was never taught anything
like this and what I was taught about
government would make such a fact
virtually unthinkable I had very slowly
and painfully doing the research I did
into Vietnam it was really Vietnam that
brought me into this trying to stop the
Vietnam
or becoming more and more interested in
the the forces that had drawn us into
such such a crazy war you know I mean
anyone with any common sense could have
foreseen at the beginning of the war it
would be as horrible as murderous and
ultimately is counterproductive as in
fact it turned out to be and yet we went
into it anyway why and I became aware of
the fact of the drug trade just under
the surface with the CIA's involvement
in Laos and that was an area where the
CIA had not just cooperated with drug
traffickers but really had helped build
up the post-war drug traffic it's
commonplace now to say that Burma is the
number one source of heroin and opium
for heroin in the world it wasn't always
this way right after World War Two opium
that they you only had about 40 tons of
opium a year produced in Burma and most
of it was consumed locally it didn't get
into the world drug traffic
we the CIA was backing the remnant
chinese nationalist armies and when they
were pushed into burma we gave them all
kinds of assistance help them to build
air strips to be able to move planes in
and out it was on the surface of it a
program to prevent the chinese
communists from moving down into
Southeast Asia but what was actually
happening was that the I'll call them
the KMT because that was the party of
chiang kai-shek who controlled these
armies all through the 20s and the 30s
they had controlled China through their
control of the drug trade they it's been
estimated that half or more of the
revenues of the KMT government of chiang
kai-shek were drug revenues and now
being pushed out of China they have no
longer in touch with an opium supply
and they turned Burma not just into a
point of resistance to protect Burma in
the countries south of it but a source
of opium for a global drug trade so they
forced the peasants there into a kind of
economic slavery where they had to
abandon their traditional food crops and
instead start growing opium all the time
we were giving them arms we were giving
them equipment and giving them planes
the comment comment on the comment on
yes and they there was a kind of forced
increase in production of opium in Burma
from 40 tons in 1946 to something like
400 tonnes by 1954
it's fluctuated wildly up and down since
then but it's up around 1,200 tonnes
today and is probably we'll come back to
this but probably at this point the
number one source of heroin for for the
world market now I think most Americans
are aware that there have been waves of
drugs that have hit America in the post
the year since World War two people were
aware of a heroin epidemic in the 60s in
the 70s and they were aware of a cocaine
epidemic in the 1980s well I remember
when the Vietnam War was over maybe
during the Vietnam War there were
supposed to be like a million some
enormous number of heroin addicts who
were returning veterans yes and there
was a lot of talk about it and then
there wasn't anymore
all right well the government's own
statistics were that something like a
third of the US forces in Vietnam became
addicted to hard drugs we know what just
sucking marijuana here but I believe
hard drugs
and this was not a permanent problem
this died down in the 70s we lost that
heroin epidemic what had happened was we
had stopped fighting the war in Vietnam
and it shows up in the statistics that
the Golden Triangle which is essentially
into China and Burma and a bit of
Thailand where we had been doing the
fighting it was up to about 1200 tons a
year at the end of the Vietnam War and
when the war stopped and we pulled all
the troops out and the local governments
restored their control they were mostly
communist governments but they were anti
drug governments and production did not
entirely disappear but it plummeted it
went down from 1,200 tons a year down to
about I think it was 200 tons in Laos
and another 30 tons in in in Thailand I
whatever the statistics were it was only
a fraction of what it had been before
and even more sharply reduced was the
amount of this getting into the world
traffic and we had a very sharp
reduction in heroin consumption in the
States but only for about five years
because what happened was that the
Vietnam War was finally over in 1975 but
starting in 79 and 80 the CIA started a
new huge covert operation this time in
Afghanistan I'm just gonna back up for
one second because I'm not sure you made
clear about the CIA's involvement in the
drug trade during the Vietnam War let me
give the general model I'm not saying
that the CIA brings the drugs into this
country I'm sure they don't I am saying
that they they go to a part of the world
and they look for the strongest allies
against communism and certainly in
Southeast Asia the the allies that they
chose were the Kuomintang who are
involved in the drug traffic it's not
just in Southeast Asia that they've
this when they tried to develop the
Contras in Central America in the 1980s
they again looked to the strongest local
forces and again these were drug
traffickers and here what they really
needed was a kind of large smuggling
operation to smuggle arms to these
non-recognized covert forces that were
based in Honduras and Costa Rica so this
legitimated planes flying in that were
smuggling arms well the the cheapest way
to get those arms smuggled in was to go
to and they and I'm talking about the
CIA going to people who were involved in
the drug traffic and letting them do
what they liked with their planes on the
return legs of the journey so this is
where you get these arms for drugs
flights there were many different
varieties of them but it there's no
question you look at all the different
aspects of the contrast supply operation
there are many different phases because
different factions rose and fill in CIA
favorite but every one of these factions
had its own drug connection so that it
wasn't just an accidentally occurring
thing it it was something that virtually
every single contra faction was helping
to finance its operations by being a
site for the trafficking of drugs and so
the same thing happened in Central
America but we also got a new heroin
epidemic in the 1980s because of the
Alliance which was forged I have to say
by Democrats under Carter
Vignesh Brzezinski made a conscious
decision to give CIA support to these
various Mujahideen factions opposing the
government in Afghanistan even though it
was publicly known publicly known at the
time that these Mujahideen were
financing their operations by drug
trafficking now what happened here I
mean the the biggest story of all in
some ways is
Afghanistan because here is a case where
Afghanistan has absolutely not been a
factor in the world drug trade or in
American drug consumption until 1979
which is the year that Brzezinski made
this decision so you had zero percent of
America's heroin coming from Afghanistan
in 1979 and by 1981 after just two years
of the CIA's covert operation the Reagan
administration's internal documents were
saying that it was over 60 percent
coming from the Pakistan Afghanistan
border and it was public knowledge
eventually the General Accounting Office
produced Statistics Canada produced
statistics on the amount of heroin
coming from that area and they estimated
it as being over 50% in their public
records so here was a thing where the
heroin started coming into this country
with the beginning of the operation and
when people went to look at what was
happening in Pakistan it became very
obvious why was the same Pakistan Army
trucks that were taking the CIA's arms
up to the Afghan border
were they trucks that were bringing the
heroin back down the hole of the traffic
was being protected by the Pakistan Army
and this recreated what was happening in
Central America where the drug trade in
on the cocaine drug trade in Honduras
which was being done by people supplying
the Contras was being protected by the
Honduran army who got a share of the
profits and as far as I know that is
still the situation today I want to
remind the audience that you're hearing
Peter Dale Scott who is most recent book
is called cocaine politics drugs armies
in the CIA and
from America and Jonathan Marshall is a
co-author of that book and I also want
to explain the the electric saw I guess
is in the background it's almost
impossible to find quiet places unless
you're in studios which we are not but
anyway I wanted to ask you about the
Kerry hearings I had the I'd listen to
those and I had the impression that the
CIA and the in the military the US
military in the in the u.s. u.s. CIA was
absolutely opening up a basis even air
strips in inside bases to drugs coming
in coming out of Central America and
into or wherever and into the United
States the Kerry committee heard
allegations about Felix Rodriguez that
Allah pango Air Force Base in El
Salvador nominally in El Salvador Air
Force Base but what a big section of it
was in fact run in effect by the
Americans as a contra supply base there
have been a number of allegations about
drugs coming in and out of Elah Pengo we
give almost no attention to that in our
book because the most sensational
allegations that were made in the Kerry
Committee were then denied by Felix
Rodriguez himself the man who was
accused of being involved in this and
the accuser then took a lie-detector
test and didn't perform very well on it
so from my point of view I've written
about eloping goes since that was ill
upon go in El Salvador
agua kotti in Honduras were two bases
where there were accusations that not
only foreigners were using these bases
but even the CIA's own airline southern
air transport also being accused of
having carried it seems to be the case
that they made trips to Colombia which
are hard to explain in terms of why
would they do that if theirs their job
is to be there supplying the Contras and
in fact when the iran-contra story first
broke the New York Times and The
Washington Post had stories about
allegations of there being drug
trafficking at ELA Pengo air force base
and we were promised at the time the
story said that these stories would be
investigated by Congress in what became
the iran-contra hearings they never were
they were not the the specific
allegations were not investigated by
Senator Kerry either senator Kerry I
think chose his target well he he wanted
to get the Republicans in his committee
to sign a report with him and so instead
of focusing directly on what the US
military had done or the CIA had done he
focused on what individuals had done and
in fact at one point in the hearings he
asked about of these traffickers who he
had been working with and the attorney
said oh you're trying to bring the CIA
into this and Senator Kerry said no I'm
not he said you mentioned that I
promised senator Bora and I would not
talk about the CIA well even though he
didn't he still ran into so much trouble
with his hearings so much plotting
against him and there are a lot of
stories which involved death threats to
witnesses and so on I won't go into but
it became very obvious there's very high
power resistance to anybody getting into
this story Senator Kerry even though as
you just heard he was leaving the CIA
out of it he still was harassed in all
kinds of ways and actually ended up
before the Senate Ethics Committee for
what he was doing he was able to clear
himself but he learned I think just how
much and how powerful the resistance is
to anybody trying to get this story out
you may have noticed the amount of
denial the nation which is a left-wing
magazine the other day
printed a story which gratuitously
attacked what it called a peculiar new
genre of drug literature in what which
says the CIA is part of the problem
this articles in the nation specifically
attacked al McCoy's book the politics of
heroin talking about the CIA
responsibility and then said this is
absurd but it could just as they were
actually talking about cocaine and could
just as easily of been talking about we
say in cocaine politics the only main
stream review of our book was in the New
York Times there was a an extremely
dishonest review which trashed our book
possibly by accusing us of a lot of
things that we had not in fact said in
the book and so this is why a lot of
journalists I think learn to stay away
from the story because I know that some
of those who've gone after it literally
have had their lives threatened right
and some people probably died yeah well
our time is just about up there's so
much to talk about we could talk for
hours and I and I just feel like it's so
important for people to know and there's
not that much we can say the positive
word is about the causes and cures
conference that we now have had a group
who are lobbying Congress to get it to
look at the CIA dimension to the drug
problem their names is the causes and
cures coalition they're at 13 24 in
North Capitol and W Washington DC 202
and their phone number there is 202 7 9
7 8 106 if anyone wants more information
they can get them from them they
produced a wonderful video in which you
have two veterans of the DEA both saying
how their top suspects when they went
after them inevitably ended up turned
out to be protges of the CIA assets of
the CIA and one of them Mike Levine
who's written a book Deep Cover talked
about how when he had actually caught
somebody red hand had given him 9
million dollars in a bank vault in Miami
for some cocaine he heard that the
the ia would get this man released he
was released he went back to Bolivia and
a couple of weeks later financed the so
called cocaine coup in Bolivia in 1980
which actually installed the cocaine
drug lords as the government of Bolivia
for a couple of years and the CIA had
been instrumental in getting this
arrested man off so that he could go
back to be part of that coup so you see
just how bad the problem is
yeah it's everything's kind of upside
down it's opposite of what it's supposed
to be and what they say it is it's
pretty crazy making and that's why it's
so important to get this information out
and of course it's so it's the wrong
people who also the wrong people the
wrong countries that really get the
flack a lot of the times we haven't
really had a chance to talk about
there's so many ramifications and that
the so-called war on drugs is more
likely to increase the flow of drugs
coming in because it increases our
connection with corrupt drug affiliated
regimes in Peru and Colombia and
elsewhere and that was exactly of course
the mistake in Indochina which led to
the great flow of heroin into this
country back in the 60s and 70s and now
we know that the American military is
moving into Latin America right into and
then and making alliances with say the
Colombian Army in the Peruvian army who
are in turn in alliance with the drug
lords in those countries and this is
under the guise of stopping drugs right
yes so it's totally Orwellian and upside
down well thank you very much dr. Peter
Dale Scott author among other things of
cocaine politics
my name's sue seprieono and thanks very
much for listening